Object Oriented Programming Laboratory
Assignment Sheet
Migrating C to C++
1. Write programs to understand to following concepts in C++. These programs need not get examined. Write these
introductory programs to understand the basic concepts of C++.
a) Flexible variable declaration
b) C++ style of input/output
c) C++ style type names
d) Enumeration values
e) Type casting
f) The use of scope resolution operator (::)
g) Constants:
h) Constants and #define
i) Constants and Pointers. (Also find some area of usage)
j) References
k) Constants and references
l) Usage of references
m) Functions that return by reference
n) Inline function
o) Inline function and macro
p) Function overloading
q) Default values of function parameters
C++ style Input/Output
2. Write a program that accepts two integers from keyboard, adds them and prints their values. Use cin and cout.
3. Create a factorial table using cout as follows:
1! = 1
2! = 2
3! = 6
…
6! = 720
Flexible Variable Declaration
4. Write a program to print 1 to 10 using a for loop. Declare the loop variable inside the for loop. Check the scope
of this variable.
5. Write a program to display Celsius to Fahrenheit conversion table using a for loop. Consider only 0˚ to 100˚
Celsius. Declare variables when they are used for the first time.Constants
6. Write a program that defines a constant PI and takes radius of a circle from keyboard and prints area of that
circle.
7. Write a function that takes an integer and returns the factorial of that number. Declare function parameter as
const. Call the function with some argument from main function, store the result and print it.
Reference
8. Write a function swap() that takes two integer arguments and interchanges the values of those arguments using
reference. Now in the main function, instantiate two integer variables with some values. Print their values. Call
the swap function with these variables. Finally print the values of those variables. Check the result.
9. Now write another function swap() that takes two strings (character array) and interchanges them without
reference parameters. Test this function using some arguments. Rewrite the function using reference parameters.
Again test this function with some arguments.
10. Check if a swap function using reference takes more or less time than one using non-reference.
Constants and references
11. Write a function that takes an integer and returns the factorial of that number. Declare function parameter as read
only reference. Call the function with some argument from main function, store the result and print it.
Constants and pointers
12. Write a function Strcpy to copy one string to another with suitable formal parameters declarations. Following
points must be considered.
a) Source string must not get modified
b) Target string is allowed to get modified
c) The Pointers must be constant pointers.
Use it to copy some strings.
Inline function
13. Write an inline function add() that takes three integer arguments and returns the sum of these arguments.
14. Check if the above inline add function takes more or less time than a non-inline version of add function.
Function Overloading
15. Consider the following two scenarios:
a) We want to find out the maximum between three integers.
b) We also want to find out the maximum element of an array of integers.
Write two overloaded functions for these two scenarios.
16. Write two overloaded functions print() such that one prints the elements of a vector and the other prints elements
of a matrix. Note that a vector and a matrix may be represented as a one-dimensional array and a
two-dimensional array respectively.
Default values for function parameters
17. Consider function add() in 3. Specify the default values for second and third parameters to 0 (zero). Now call this
function with three, two and one arguments and see the result.Classes and Objects
18. Write a simple class that represents a class of geometrical points each of which has three coordinates. The class
should have appropriate constructor(s). Also add a m:!ember function distance() that calculates Euclidian
distance between two points. Now create two points, find the distance between them and print it.
19. Write a class for the geometrical shape rectangle. Write suitable constructors and member functions. Add a
member function area() that calculates the area of a rectangle. Create 4 rectangles and print their respective area.
20. Write a class that represents a class of wireless device. A device has a location (point object may be used), a
fixed unique id, and a fixed circular transmission range. Write suitable constructors and member functions for
this class. Instantiates 10 such devices. Choose location (coordinates) and transmission range of the devices
randomly. Now, for each of these devices, find the neighbor devices (i.e. devices that belong to the transmission
range). Suppose, all of these devices have moved to a new location (randomly chosen). Find out the new set of
neighbors for each of these devices.
21. Write a class Vector for one dimensional array. Write suitable constructor/copy constructor. Also add member
functions for perform basic operations (such as addition, subtraction, equality, less, greater etc.). Create vectors
and check if those operations are working correctly.
22. Write a class IntArray for one dimensional integer array. Implement the necessary constructor, copy constructor,
and destructor (if necessary) in this class. Implement other member functions to perform operations, such adding
two arrays, reversing an array, sorting an array etc. Create an IntArray object having elements 1, 2 and 3 in it.
Print its elements. Now, create another IntArray object which is an exact copy of the previous object. Print its
elements. Now, reverse the elements of the last object. Finally print elements of both the objects.
23. Create a simple class SavingsAccount for savings account used in banks as follows: Each SavingsAccount object
should have three data members to store the account holder’s name, unique account number and balance of the
account. Assume account numbers are integers and generated sequentially. Note that once an account number is
allocated to an account, it does not change during the entire operational period of the account. The bank also
specifies a rate of interest for all savings accounts created. Write relevant methods (such as withdraw, deposit
etc.) in the class. The bank restricts that each account must have a minimum balance of Rs. 1000. Now create
100 SavingsAccount objects specifying balance at random ranging from Rs. 1,000 to 1,00,000. Now, calculate
the interest for one year to be paid to each account and deposit the interest to the corresponding balance. Also
find out total amount of interest to be paid to all accounts in one year.
24. Write some programs to understand the notion of constant member functions, mutable data members etc.
25. Write the definition for a class called Complex that has private floating point data members for storing real and
imaginary parts. The class has the following public member functions:
setReal() and setImg() to set the real and imaginary part respectively.
getReal() and getImg() to get the real and imaginary part respectively.
disp() to display complex number object
sum() to sum two complex numbers & return a complex number
Write main function to create three complex number objects. Set the value in two objects and call sum() to
calculate sum and assign it in third object. Display all complex numbers.
26. Complete the class with all function definitions for a stack
class Stack {
int *buffer, top;
public :
Stack(int); //create a stack with specified size
void push(int); //push the specified item
int pop(); //return the top element
void disp(); //displays elements in the stack in top to bottom order}
Now, create a stack with size 10, push 2, 3, 4 and 5 in that order and finally pop one element. Display elements
present in the stack.
27. Complete the class with all function definitions for a circular queue
class Queue {
int *data;
int front, rear;
public :
Queue(int ); //create queue with specified size
void add(int); //add specified element to the queue
int remove();//delete element from the queue
void disp(); //displays all elements in the queue(front to rear order)
}
Now, create a queue with size 10 add 2, 3, 4 and 5 in that order and finally delete two elements. Display
elements present in the stack.
28. Write a class for your Grade card. The grade card is given to each student of a department per semester. The
grade card typically contains the name of the department, name of the student, roll number, semester, a list of
subjects with their marks and a calculated CGPA. Create 60 such grade cards in a 3
rd semester with relevant data
and find the name and roll number of student having highest CGPA.
29. Create a class for Book. A book has unique isbn (string), title, a list of authors, and a price. Write relevant
functions. Now write a class BookStore which has a list of books. There may be multiple copies of a book in the
book store. Write relevant member functions. Write a function books() that returns list of unique isbn numbers of
the books, a function noOfCopies() that returns the number of copies available for a given isbn number and a
function totalPrice() that returns the total price of all the books. Create a book store having a number of books
(multiple copies). Now, for each book, print number of copies of that book along with its title.
Operator Overloading
30. Write a class “Point” which stores coordinates in (x, y) form. Define necessary constructor, destructor and other
reader/writer functions. Now overload ‘-’ operator to calculate the distance between two points.
31. Design a class Complex that includes all the necessary functions and operators like =, +, -, *, /.
32. Implement a class “Quadratic” that represents second-degree polynomial i.e. polynomial of type ax
2+bx+c. The
class will require three data members corresponding to a, b and c. Implement the following:
a) A constructor (including a default constructor which create a null polynomial)
b) Overload the addition operator to add two polynomials of degree 2.
c) Overload << and >> operators to print and read polynomials.
d) A function to compute the value of polynomial for a given x.
e) A function to compute roots of the equation ax
2+bx+c=0. Remember, root may be a complex number.
You may implement “Complex” class to represent root of the quadratic equation.
33. A program is given as follows:
class INT {
int i;
public :
INT(int a):i(a){}
~INT() {}
};
int main() {
int x = 3;
INT y = x;y++ = ++y;
x = y;
return 0;
}
Write extra functions/operators required in the INT class to make main program work. Provide suitable
implementation for the added functions/operators.
34. Design and implement class(es) to support the following main program.
int main() {
IntArray i(10);
for(int k = 0; k < 10; k++)
i[k] = k;
cout << i;
return 0;
}
35. You are given a main program:
int main() {
Integer a = 4, b = a, c;
c = a+b++;
int i = a;
cout << a << b << c;
return 0;
}
Design and implement class(es) to support the main program.
36. Design and implement class(es) to support the following code segment.
Table t(4, 5), t1(4, 5);
cin >> t;
t[0][0] = 5;
int x = t[2][3];
t1 = t;
cout << t << “\n” << t1;
37. Design and implement class(es) to support the following code segment.
Index in(4), out(10);
int x = in;
int y = in + out;
in = 2;
Integer i;
i = in;
Inheritance
38. Write empty class declarations for the following class hierarchy.
 Base
 Derived
39. Write empty class declarations for the following class hierarchy.
 Base1 Base2
 Derived
40. Write empty class declarations for the following class hierarchy.
A B C
D E F
41. Write a class Person having data member name, age, height etc. Write proper constructors, methods to get/set
them and a method printDetails() that prints all information of a person. Now write another class Student from
Person and add data members roll, year of admission etc. Write constructors, methods to get/set them and a
override printDetails(). Now create a Person and a Student object and call printDetails() function on them to
display their information.
Now Create an array of pointers to Person and store addresses of two Persons and two Students. Call
printDetails() on all elements (a loop may be used). Are you getting output which is supposed to come? Make
printDetails() function virtual in the base class and check the result.
42. Write a class Employee having data member name, salary etc. Write proper constructors, methods to get/set
them and a virtual method printDetails() that prints all information of a person. Now write two classes Manager
and Clerk from Employee. Add ‘type’ and ‘allowance’ in the manager and Clerk respectively. Write
constructors, methods to get/set them and a override printDetails(). Now create a Manager and a Clerk object and
call printDetails() function on them to display their information.
Now Create an array of pointers to Employee and store addresses of two Employee, two Managers and two
Clerks. Call printDetails() on all elements (a loop may be used). Also find the total salary drawn by all
employees.
43. Write class definitions for the following class hierarchy
 Shape2D
 Circle Rectangle
The Shape2D class represents two dimensional shapes that should have pure virtual functions area(), perimeter()
etc. Implement these functions in Circle and Rectangle. Also write proper constructor(s) and other functions you
think appropriate in the Circle and Rectangle class. Now create an array of 5 Shape2D pointers. Create 3 Circle
and 2 Rectangles objects and place their addresses in that array. Use a loop to print area and perimeter of all
shapes on this array.
44.Implement the Shape hierarchy as shown in the figure. Each TwoDShape should contain function getArea to
calculate the area of two-dimensional shape. Each ThreeDShape should have member functions getArea and
getVolume to calculate the surface area and volume of the three-dimensional shape respectively. Create a
program that uses Vector of Shape pointers to objects of each concrete class in the hierarchy. Now write a
program that processes all the shapes in the Vector such that if the shape is a TwoDShape it prints name of shape
and its area while it prints name of shape, its area and volume if the shape is a ThreeDShape.
45. Write a program to illustrate the role of virtual destructor.
Exception Handling
46. Two integers are taken from keyboard. Then perform division operation. Write a try block to throw an exception
when division by zero occurs and appropriate catch block to handle the exception thrown.
47. Design a class Stack with necessary exception handling.48. Vehicles may be either stopped of running in a lane. If two vehicles are running in opposite direction in a single
lane there is a chance of collision. Write a C++ program using exception handling to avoid collisions. You are
free to make necessary assumptions.
Templates
49. Write a template function max() that is capable of finding maximum of two things (that can be compared). Used
this function to find (i) maximum of two integers, (ii) maximum of two complex numbers (previous code may be
reused). Now write a specialized template function for strings (i.e. char *). Also find the maximum of two strings
using this template function.
50. Write a template function swap() that is capable of interchanging the values of two variables. Used this function
to swap (i) two integers, (ii) two complex numbers (previous code may be reused). Now write a specialized
template function for the class Stack (previous code may be reused). Also swap two stacks using this template
function.
51. Create a C++ template class for implementation of Stack data structure. Create a Stack of integers and a Stack of
complex numbers created earlier (code may be reused). Perform some push and pop operations on these stacks.
Finally print the elements remained in those stacks.